VIP-01
======

Basic protocol flow description
-------------------------------

`draft` `mandatory`

This VIP defines the basic protocol that should be implemented by everybody. New VIPs may add new optional (or mandatory) fields and messages and features to the structures and flows described here.

## Messages
Messages are just ANS-104 objects and are sent to the `Event` handler, See [Messages](https://cookbook_ao.g8way.io/concepts/messages.html)

## Tags

### Content

The `Content` tag contains a JSON string or plain text

### Kinds

Kinds are a mandatory tag for AO messages, specifying how clients should interpret the meaning of each message. Each AO message must include the `Kind` tag to ensure proper processing and interpretation by clients and hubs.

The `Kind` tag is an integer that defines the nature of the message and determines how its Content and associated tags should be treated. This mandatory tag ensures that AO messages are both organized and extensible. Below is the updated breakdown of `Kind` tags and their conventions:

- **`0`**: **User Metadata**: The `Content` contains a JSON string with fields such as `{name: <username>, about: <string>, picture: <url, string>}` describing the user.

- **`1`**: **Text Note**: A generic message for social applications, often containing plain text or simple notes.

These `Kind` conventions simplify the development and processing of AO messages while maintaining flexibility for future enhancements.



## Filters

The `Filters` tag `<filtersX>` is a stringified JSON array that determines what messages will be queried, it can have the following attributes:

```json
[{
  "ids": <a list of event ids>,
  "authors": <a list of lowercase pubkeys, the pubkey of a message must be one of these>,
  "Kinds": <a list of a Kind numbers>,
  "#<single-letter (a-zA-Z)>": <a list of tag values, for #p — a list of pubkeys, etc.>,
  "since": <an integer unix timestamp in seconds. messages must have a Timestamp >= to this to pass>,
  "until": <an integer unix timestamp in seconds. messages must have a Timestamp <= to this to pass>,
  "limit": <maximum number of messages hubs SHOULD return in the initial query>
}]
```

Upon receiving a message to the `FetchEvents` handler, the hub SHOULD return messages that match the filter.

Filter attributes containing lists (`ids`, `authors`, `Kinds` and tag filters like `#p`) are JSON arrays with one or more values. At least one of the arrays' values must match the relevant field in an event for the condition to be considered a match. For scalar event attributes such as `authors` and `Kind`, the attribute from the event must be contained in the filter list. In the case of tag attributes such as `#p`, for which an event may have multiple values, the event and filter condition values must have at least one item in common.

The `ids`, `authors`, and `#p` filter lists MUST contain exact 64-character lowercase hex values.

The `since` and `until` properties can be used to specify the time range of messages returned in the query. If a filter includes the `since` property, messages with `Timestamp` greater than or equal to `since` are considered to match the filter. The `until` property is similar except that `Timestamp` must be less than or equal to `until`. In short, an event matches a filter if `since <= Timestamp <= until` holds.

All conditions of a filter that are specified must match for an event for it to pass the filter, i.e., multiple conditions are interpreted as `&&` conditions.

A `FetchEvents` message may contain multiple filters. In this case, messages that match any of the filters are to be returned, i.e., multiple filters are to be interpreted as `||` conditions.

The `limit` property of a filter is only valid for the initial query and MUST be ignored afterwards. When `limit: n` is present it is assumed that the messages returned in the initial query will be the last `n` messages ordered by the `FetchEvents`. Newer messages should appear first, and in the case of ties the event with the lowest id (first in lexical order) should be first. It is safe to return less messages than `limit` specifies, but it is expected that hubs do not return (much) more messages than requested so clients don't get unnecessarily overwhelmed by data.
